README.md, before:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey?branch=master)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/django-survey-and-report.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/django-survey-and-report)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/ambv/black)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)

# Django survey

A django survey app that can export results as CSV or PDF using your native language.

`django-survey-and-report` on pypi. Based on and compatible with `django-survey`. You
will be able to migrate your data from an ancient version of `django-survey`, but it has
been ported to python 3, and you can export results as CSV or PDF using your native
language.

Professional support for django-survey-and-report is available as part of the
[Tidelift Subscription](https://tidelift.com/subscription/pkg/pypi-django-survey-and-report?utm_source=pypi-django-survey-and-report&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=enterprise)

## Table of contents

- [Language available](#language-available)
- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Making a survey](#making-a-survey)
- [Generating a pdf report from the survey's result](#generating-a-pdf-report-from-the-surveys-result)
  - [Basic example](#basic-example)
  - [Sankey's diagram](#sankey-diagram)
  - [Advanced example](#advanced-example)
  - [Implementing a custom treatment](#implementing-a-custom-treatment)
- [Credit](#credits)

## Language available

The software is developed in english. Other available languages are :

- [x] Brazilian-Portuguese thanks to [Rafael Capaci](https://github.com/capaci)
- [x] Chinese thanks to [朱聖黎 (Zhu Sheng Li)](https://github.com/digglife/)
- [x] French thanks to [Pierre Sassoulas](https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/)
- [x] German thanks to [Georg Elsas](https://github.com/gjelsas)
- [x] Indonesian thanks to [Dhana Dhira](https://github.com/ddhira123)
- [x] Japanese thanks to [Nobukuni Suzue](https://github.com/nsuzue/)
- [x] Spanish thanks to [Javier Ordóñez](https://github.com/ordonja/)
- [x] Russian thanks to [Vlad M.](https://github.com/manchos/)
- [x] Polish thanks to [Daniel Horner](https://github.com/d-horner/)
- [x] Dutch thanks to [John Guyver](https://github.com/JohnGuyver117)
- [x] Turkish thanks to [Hüseyin Emre Armağan](https://github.com/Telomeraz)
- [x] Greek thanks to [Sotirios Zogos](https://github.com/sotiriszogos)

## Getting started

Add `django-survey-and-report` to your requirements and get it with pip.

```bash
echo 'django-survey-and-report' >> requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Add `bootstrapform` and `survey` in the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your settings :

```python
INSTALLED_APPS = [
	# Your own installed apps here
]

from pathlib import Path

CSV_DIRECTORY = Path("csv") # Define the directory where csv are exported
TEX_DIRECTORY = Path("tex") # Define the directory where tex files and pdf are exported

INSTALLED_APPS += [
	'bootstrapform',
	'survey'
]
```

Add a URL entry to your project’s urls.py, for example:

```python
from django.conf import settings
from django.conf.urls import include

try:
    from django.conf.urls import url
except ImportError:
    # Django 4.0 replaced url by something else
    # See https://stackoverflow.com/a/70319607/2519059
    from django.urls import re_path as url

urlpatterns = [
    # Your own url pattern here
]

if 'survey' in settings.INSTALLED_APPS:
    urlpatterns += [
        url(r'^survey/', include('survey.urls'))
    ]
```

Note: you can use whatever you wish as the URL prefix.

You can also change some options:

```python
# Permit to open the csv in Excel without problem with separator
# Using this trick : https://superuser.com/a/686415/567417
EXCEL_COMPATIBLE_CSV = True

# The separator for questions (Default to ",")
CHOICES_SEPARATOR = "|"

# What is shown in export when the user do not answer (Default to "Left blank")
USER_DID_NOT_ANSWER = "NAA"

# Path to the Tex configuration file (default to an internal file that should be sufficient)
from pathlib import Path
TEX_CONFIGURATION_FILE = Path("tex", "tex.conf")

# Default color for exported pdf pie (default to "red!50")
SURVEY_DEFAULT_PIE_COLOR = "blue!50"
```

To uninstall `django-survey-and-report`, simply comment out or remove the 'survey' line
in your `INSTALLED_APPS`.

If you want to use the pdf rendering you need to install `xelatex`. If you're using the
Sankey's diagram generation you will also have to install `python-tk` (for python 2.7)
or `python3-tk` (for python 3.x).

## Making a survey

Using the admin interface you can create surveys, add questions, give questions
categories, and mark them as required or not. You can define choices for answers using
comma separated words.

![Creating of a question](doc/creating_questions.png "Creating of a question")

The front-end survey view then automatically populates based on the questions that have
been defined and published in the admin interface. We use bootstrap3 to render them.

![Answering a survey](doc/answering_questions.png "Answering a survey")

Submitted responses can be viewed via the admin backend, in an exported csv or in a pdf
generated with latex.

## Generating a pdf report from the survey's result

There is a default configuration for PDF generation, but you might want to change
`TEX_CONFIGURATION_FILE` for better results (in particular for language other than
english).

You can manage the way the report is created in a yaml file, globally, survey by survey,
or question by question. In order to render pdf you will need to install `xelatex`. You
will also need python3-tk for sankey's diagram.

The results are generated for the server only when needed, but you can force it as a
developer with:

```bash
python manage.py exportresult -h
```

Following is an example of a configuration file. you can generate one with:

```bash
python manage.py generatetexconf -h
```

### Basic example

```yaml
generic:
  document_option: 11pt
"Test survëy":
  document_class: report
  questions:
    "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong> adipiscing elit.":
      chart:
        type: polar
        text: pin
    "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit.":
      chart:
        type: cloud
        text: inside
```

The pdf is then generated using the very good pgf-pie library.

![The generated pdf for the polar and pin options](doc/report.png "The generated pdf for the polar and pin options")

![The generated pdf for the cloud and inside options](doc/report_2.png "The generated pdf for the cloud and inside options")

### Sankey diagram

If you installed python3-tk, you can also show the relation between two questions using
a sankey diagram :

```yaml
"Lorem ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong> adipiscing elit.":
  chart:
    type: sankey
    question: "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit."
```

You get this as a result:

![The generated pdf for the sankey example](doc/sankey.png "The generated pdf for the sankey example")

### Advanced example

You can also limit the answers shown by cardinality, filter them, group them together
and choose the color for each answer or group of answers.

If you use this configuration for the previous question:

```yaml
"Test survëy":
  "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit.":
    multiple_charts:
      "Sub Sub Section with radius=3":
        color:
          Yës: blue!50
          No: red!50
          Whatever: red!50!blue!50
        radius: 3
      "Sub Sub Section with text=pin":
        group_together:
          Nah:
            - No
            - Whatever
          K.:
            - Yës
        color:
          Nah: blue!33!red!66
          K.: blue!50
        text: pin
    chart:
      radius: 1
      type: cloud
      text: inside
```

You get this as a result:

![The generated pdf for the multiple charts example](doc/multicharts.png "The generated pdf for the multiple charts example")

### Implementing a custom treatment

If you want to make your own treatment you can use your own class, for example.

Configuration:

```yaml
"Test survëy":
  questions:
    "Ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong>  adipiscing elit.":
      chart:
        type: survey.tests.exporter.tex.CustomQuestion2TexChild
```

Code in `survey.tests.exporter.tex.CustomQuestion2TexChild`:

```python
from survey.exporter.tex.question2tex_chart import Question2TexChart


class CustomQuestion2TexChild(Question2TexChart):

    def get_results(self):
        self.type = "polar"
        return """        2/There were no answer at all,
        3/But we have a custom treatment to show some,
        2/You can make minor changes too !"""
```

Result:

![The generated pdf for the custom example](doc/custom.png "The generated pdf for the custom example")

For a full example of a configuration file look at `example_conf.yaml` in doc, you can
also generate your configuration file with `python manage.py generatetexconf -h`, it
will create the default skeleton for every survey and question.

To guide you during the python development, you can read:

- The default reporter for PieChart in `Question2TexChart` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_chart.py#L13
- The Sankey reporter in `Question3TexSankey` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_sankey.py#L15
- The Raw reporter in `Question2TexRax` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_raw.py.

Do not hesitate to make a pull request with your new exporter if it can be of interest
for others I'll integrate it.

## Credits

Based on [jessykate's django-survey](https://github.com/jessykate/django-survey), and
contribution by jibaku, joshualoving, and ijasperyang in forks of jessykate's project.

We use [anazalea's pySankey](https://github.com/anazalea/pySankey) for sankey's diagram
during reporting.

Commit message:

Replace django-bootstrap-form to django-crispy-forms

README.md, after:

[![Build Status](https://travis-ci.org/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey.svg?branch=master)](https://travis-ci.org/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey)
[![Coverage Status](https://coveralls.io/repos/github/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/badge.svg?branch=master)](https://coveralls.io/github/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey?branch=master)
[![PyPI version](https://badge.fury.io/py/django-survey-and-report.svg)](https://badge.fury.io/py/django-survey-and-report)
[![Code style: black](https://img.shields.io/badge/code%20style-black-000000.svg)](https://github.com/ambv/black)
[![PRs Welcome](https://img.shields.io/badge/PRs-welcome-brightgreen.svg?style=flat-square)](http://makeapullrequest.com)

# Django survey

A django survey app that can export results as CSV or PDF using your native language.

`django-survey-and-report` on pypi. Based on and compatible with `django-survey`. You
will be able to migrate your data from an ancient version of `django-survey`, but it has
been ported to python 3, and you can export results as CSV or PDF using your native
language.

Professional support for django-survey-and-report is available as part of the
[Tidelift Subscription](https://tidelift.com/subscription/pkg/pypi-django-survey-and-report?utm_source=pypi-django-survey-and-report&utm_medium=referral&utm_campaign=enterprise)

## Table of contents

- [Language available](#language-available)
- [Getting started](#getting-started)
- [Making a survey](#making-a-survey)
- [Generating a pdf report from the survey's result](#generating-a-pdf-report-from-the-surveys-result)
  - [Basic example](#basic-example)
  - [Sankey's diagram](#sankey-diagram)
  - [Advanced example](#advanced-example)
  - [Implementing a custom treatment](#implementing-a-custom-treatment)
- [Credit](#credits)

## Language available

The software is developed in english. Other available languages are :

- [x] Brazilian-Portuguese thanks to [Rafael Capaci](https://github.com/capaci)
- [x] Chinese thanks to [朱聖黎 (Zhu Sheng Li)](https://github.com/digglife/)
- [x] French thanks to [Pierre Sassoulas](https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/)
- [x] German thanks to [Georg Elsas](https://github.com/gjelsas)
- [x] Indonesian thanks to [Dhana Dhira](https://github.com/ddhira123)
- [x] Japanese thanks to [Nobukuni Suzue](https://github.com/nsuzue/)
- [x] Spanish thanks to [Javier Ordóñez](https://github.com/ordonja/)
- [x] Russian thanks to [Vlad M.](https://github.com/manchos/)
- [x] Polish thanks to [Daniel Horner](https://github.com/d-horner/)
- [x] Dutch thanks to [John Guyver](https://github.com/JohnGuyver117)
- [x] Turkish thanks to [Hüseyin Emre Armağan](https://github.com/Telomeraz)
- [x] Greek thanks to [Sotirios Zogos](https://github.com/sotiriszogos)

## Getting started

Add `django-survey-and-report` to your requirements and get it with pip.

```bash
echo 'django-survey-and-report' >> requirements.txt
pip install -r requirements.txt
```

Add `survey` in the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your settings :

```python
INSTALLED_APPS = [
	# Your own installed apps here
]

from pathlib import Path

CSV_DIRECTORY = Path("csv") # Define the directory where csv are exported
TEX_DIRECTORY = Path("tex") # Define the directory where tex files and pdf are exported

INSTALLED_APPS += [
	'survey'
]
```

For improved form rendering you can use django-crispy-forms. To do this, install the optional dependencies:

```bash
pip install django-survey-and-report[crispy]
```

Add apps in the `INSTALLED_APPS` in your settings:

```python
INSTALLED_APPS += [
    'crispy_forms',
    'crispy_bootstrap5',
]

CRISPY_ALLOWED_TEMPLATE_PACKS = "bootstrap5"
CRISPY_TEMPLATE_PACK = "bootstrap5"
```

Add a URL entry to your project's urls.py, for example:

```python
from django.conf import settings
from django.conf.urls import include

try:
    from django.conf.urls import url
except ImportError:
    # Django 4.0 replaced url by something else
    # See https://stackoverflow.com/a/70319607/2519059
    from django.urls import re_path as url

urlpatterns = [
    # Your own url pattern here
]

if 'survey' in settings.INSTALLED_APPS:
    urlpatterns += [
        url(r'^survey/', include('survey.urls'))
    ]
```

Note: you can use whatever you wish as the URL prefix.

You can also change some options:

```python
# Permit to open the csv in Excel without problem with separator
# Using this trick : https://superuser.com/a/686415/567417
EXCEL_COMPATIBLE_CSV = True

# The separator for questions (Default to ",")
CHOICES_SEPARATOR = "|"

# What is shown in export when the user do not answer (Default to "Left blank")
USER_DID_NOT_ANSWER = "NAA"

# Path to the Tex configuration file (default to an internal file that should be sufficient)
from pathlib import Path
TEX_CONFIGURATION_FILE = Path("tex", "tex.conf")

# Default color for exported pdf pie (default to "red!50")
SURVEY_DEFAULT_PIE_COLOR = "blue!50"
```

To uninstall `django-survey-and-report`, simply comment out or remove the 'survey' line
in your `INSTALLED_APPS`.

If you want to use the pdf rendering you need to install `xelatex`. If you're using the
Sankey's diagram generation you will also have to install `python3-tk`.

## Making a survey

Using the admin interface you can create surveys, add questions, give questions
categories, and mark them as required or not. You can define choices for answers using
comma separated words.

![Creating of a question](doc/creating_questions.png "Creating of a question")

The front-end survey view then automatically populates based on the questions that have
been defined and published in the admin interface. We use bootstrap3 to render them.

![Answering a survey](doc/answering_questions.png "Answering a survey")

Submitted responses can be viewed via the admin backend, in an exported csv or in a pdf
generated with latex.

## Generating a pdf report from the survey's result

There is a default configuration for PDF generation, but you might want to change
`TEX_CONFIGURATION_FILE` for better results (in particular for language other than
english).

You can manage the way the report is created in a yaml file, globally, survey by survey,
or question by question. In order to render pdf you will need to install `xelatex`. You
will also need python3-tk for sankey's diagram.

The results are generated for the server only when needed, but you can force it as a
developer with:

```bash
python manage.py exportresult -h
```

Following is an example of a configuration file. you can generate one with:

```bash
python manage.py generatetexconf -h
```

### Basic example

```yaml
generic:
  document_option: 11pt
"Test survëy":
  document_class: report
  questions:
    "Lorem ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong> adipiscing elit.":
      chart:
        type: polar
        text: pin
    "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit.":
      chart:
        type: cloud
        text: inside
```

The pdf is then generated using the very good pgf-pie library.

![The generated pdf for the polar and pin options](doc/report.png "The generated pdf for the polar and pin options")

![The generated pdf for the cloud and inside options](doc/report_2.png "The generated pdf for the cloud and inside options")

### Sankey diagram

If you installed python3-tk, you can also show the relation between two questions using
a sankey diagram :

```yaml
"Lorem ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong> adipiscing elit.":
  chart:
    type: sankey
    question: "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit."
```

You get this as a result:

![The generated pdf for the sankey example](doc/sankey.png "The generated pdf for the sankey example")

### Advanced example

You can also limit the answers shown by cardinality, filter them, group them together
and choose the color for each answer or group of answers.

If you use this configuration for the previous question:

```yaml
"Test survëy":
  "Dolor sit amët, consectetur<strong>  adipiscing</strong>  elit.":
    multiple_charts:
      "Sub Sub Section with radius=3":
        color:
          Yës: blue!50
          No: red!50
          Whatever: red!50!blue!50
        radius: 3
      "Sub Sub Section with text=pin":
        group_together:
          Nah:
            - No
            - Whatever
          K.:
            - Yës
        color:
          Nah: blue!33!red!66
          K.: blue!50
        text: pin
    chart:
      radius: 1
      type: cloud
      text: inside
```

You get this as a result:

![The generated pdf for the multiple charts example](doc/multicharts.png "The generated pdf for the multiple charts example")

### Implementing a custom treatment

If you want to make your own treatment you can use your own class, for example.

Configuration:

```yaml
"Test survëy":
  questions:
    "Ipsum dolor sit amët, <strong> consectetur </strong>  adipiscing elit.":
      chart:
        type: survey.tests.exporter.tex.CustomQuestion2TexChild
```

Code in `survey.tests.exporter.tex.CustomQuestion2TexChild`:

```python
from survey.exporter.tex.question2tex_chart import Question2TexChart


class CustomQuestion2TexChild(Question2TexChart):

    def get_results(self):
        self.type = "polar"
        return """        2/There were no answer at all,
        3/But we have a custom treatment to show some,
        2/You can make minor changes too !"""
```

Result:

![The generated pdf for the custom example](doc/custom.png "The generated pdf for the custom example")

For a full example of a configuration file look at `example_conf.yaml` in doc, you can
also generate your configuration file with `python manage.py generatetexconf -h`, it
will create the default skeleton for every survey and question.

To guide you during the python development, you can read:

- The default reporter for PieChart in `Question2TexChart` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_chart.py#L13
- The Sankey reporter in `Question3TexSankey` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_sankey.py#L15
- The Raw reporter in `Question2TexRax` :
  https://github.com/Pierre-Sassoulas/django-survey/blob/master/survey/exporter/tex/question2tex_raw.py.

Do not hesitate to make a pull request with your new exporter if it can be of interest
for others I'll integrate it.

## Credits

Based on [jessykate's django-survey](https://github.com/jessykate/django-survey), and
contribution by jibaku, joshualoving, and ijasperyang in forks of jessykate's project.

We use [anazalea's pySankey](https://github.com/anazalea/pySankey) for sankey's diagram
during reporting.
